(questions-target)=
# Template questions

During project creation or when an update introduces a new variable, you will be prompted with some of the following questions:

:::{question} project_name
:::
## `project_name`
The name of the project, particularly for PyPI.

The final name depends on {question}`no_saltext_namespace`.

**Example**: `vault`

:::{important}
Do not include the `saltext.` namespace here.
:::

:::{question} author
:::
## `author`
The main author’s name for PyPI package metadata and licensing.

**Example**: `Foo Bar`

:::{question} author_email
:::
## `author_email`
A contact email address for PyPI package metadata.

**Example**: `foo@b.ar`

:::{question} integration_name
:::
## `integration_name`
The name of the integrated service, used in autogenerated documentation and README.

**Example**: `HashiCorp Vault`

:::{question} summary
:::
## `summary`
A short description of the project for PyPI metadata, documentation, and README.

**Example**: `Salt extension for interacting with HashiCorp Vault`

:::{question} url
:::
## `url`
The project's main URL for PyPI metadata, typically the hosted git repository.

**Example**: `https://github.com/salt-extensions/saltext-vault`

:::{question} source_url
:::
## `source_url`
The URL of the hosted git repository for PyPI metadata.

**Example**: `https://github.com/salt-extensions/saltext-vault`

:::{question} tracker_url
:::
## `tracker_url`
The URL of the issue tracker for PyPI metadata.

**Example**: `https://github.com/salt-extensions/saltext-vault/issues`

:::{question} package_name
:::
## `package_name`
The Python package name used for importing. The final name depends on {question}`no_saltext_namespace`.

**Example**: `vault`

:::{important}
Do not include the `saltext.` namespace here.
:::

:::{question} license
:::
## `license`
Select a license. Any license other than Apache 2.0 requires manual management.

:::{question} license_classifier
:::
## `license_classifier`
The license classifier for PyPI metadata.

**Example**: `License :: OSI Approved :: GNU General Public License v2 or later (GPLv2+)`

:::{note}
Only asked if a non-Apache {question}`license` is selected.
:::

:::{question} loaders
:::
## `loaders`
Choose the Salt module types this extension should provide.

:::{question} salt_version
:::
## `salt_version`
The minimum Salt version to support. Influences package dependencies and versions that are tested against.

:::{question} python_requires
:::
## `python_requires`
The minimum Python version to support. Also affects pre-commit autoformatting hooks.

:::{question} max_salt_version
:::
## `max_salt_version`
The maximum Salt version to support.

:::{hint}
This is only relevant when non-centralized {question}`workflows` are used, as it affects the Salt versions tests are run against.
:::

:::{question} no_saltext_namespace
:::
## `no_saltext_namespace`
Whether to use the `saltext.` namespace for the Python package.

:::{question} ssh_fixtures
:::
## `ssh_fixtures`
Include test fixtures for Salt-SSH tests (`salt_ssh_cli` etc.). Defaults to true if `wrapper` {question}`modules <loaders>` are included.

:::{question} test_containers
:::
## `test_containers`
Add support for running containers in the test suite (for functional and integration tests).

:::{question} workflows
:::
## `workflows`
Select a GitHub Actions workflow style:

**org**
:  Rely on reusable workflows from the `salt-extensions` GitHub organization.

**enhanced**
:  Equivalent workflows to `org`, but stored in the extension repository.
   You need to [setup required secrets](required-secrets-target) yourself.

**basic**
:  Provided for compatibility with the deprecated create-salt-extension tool (not recommended for new projects).

:::{note}
Not asked if {question}`source_url` is not on GitHub.
:::

:::{question} os_support
:::
## `os_support`
Select supported operating systems. Usually, you should leave the default of `Linux`, `macOS` and `Windows`, but some extensions only make sense on specific systems.

This question influences on which systems the tests are run.

:::{note}
Only asked if `enhanced` {question}`workflows` were selected.
:::

:::{question} deploy_docs
:::
## `deploy_docs`
Decide when to [publish documentation to GitHub pages](docs-publish-target):

**never**
:  Don’t publish documentation.

**release**
:  Publish when a release is tagged.
   This ensures documentation is in sync with the released functionality.

**rolling**
:  Publish on `push` and `tag` events to the default branch.
   This ensures upcoming unreleased changes are displayed in the changelog.  

:::{important}
Ensure your GitHub Actions workflow is [allowed to publish](docs-publish-setup-target) to your GitHub Pages site.
:::

:::{note}
The current workflows do not support versioned documentation.
:::

:::{note}
Not asked if {question}`source_url` is not on GitHub or the `basic` {question}`workflows` have been selected.
:::

:::{question} docs_url
:::
## `docs_url`
The URL for hosted documentation, typically your GitHub Pages URL if using {question}`deploy_docs`.

**Example**: `https://salt-extensions.github.io/saltext-vault/`

:::{question} coc_contact
:::
## `coc_contact`
A contact email for Code of Conduct complaints.

**Example**: `foo@b.ar`

:::{question} copyright_begin
:::
## `copyright_begin`
The starting year of the copyright range.

**Example**: `2024`

:::{question} relax_pylint
:::
## `relax_pylint`
Suppress some Pylint messages that can cause noise (`consider-using-f-string`)
or be time-intense (`too-many-*`) or difficult
(`redefined-builtin`, `redefined-outer-name`) to solve with legacy code.

Additionally suppresses `unused-argument` in the test suite, often caused
by requesting fixtures in the function signature instead of using
`@pytest.mark.usefixtures`. Note that the decorator does not work on
fixtures requesting other fixtures.
